Docs: Added tutorial on symbiosis (#387)
rsksmart/devportal: webinars/202007-005/slides.md

---

## Pre-requisites

[github.com/bguiz/workshop-rsk-prereqs](https://github.com/bguiz/workshop-rsk-prereqs/)

[POSIX compliant shell](https://github.com/bguiz/workshop-rsk-prereqs/blob/master/walkthru.md#posix-compliant-shell) /
[curl](https://github.com/bguiz/workshop-rsk-prereqs/blob/master/walkthru.md#curl) /
[NodeJs](https://github.com/bguiz/workshop-rsk-prereqs/blob/master/walkthru.md#nodejs) /
[Code editor](https://github.com/bguiz/workshop-rsk-prereqs/blob/master/walkthru.md#code-editor) /
[Truffle](https://github.com/bguiz/workshop-rsk-prereqs/blob/master/walkthru.md#truffle) /
[Java](https://github.com/bguiz/workshop-rsk-prereqs/blob/master/walkthru.md#java) /
[RSKj](https://github.com/bguiz/workshop-rsk-prereqs/blob/master/walkthru.md#rskj)

NOTE:

- Please make sure you have all of these things installed and working on your system

---

## Testing JS

- **None** of these:
  - Smart contracts, Solidity, DApps
- **Instead**:
  - Only Javascript

NOTE:

`Brendan`

The title of this webinar is testing smart contracts with Truffle.
But we will not start with any of those things at all.
Instead we'll focus solely on Javascript.

> After we have done out first hands on,

Author: our?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After we have done our first hands on,
```

you will see why!

---

## Testing JS: Objectives

- What is testing?
- Software engineering principles - Why test?
- Writing tests in JS using Mocha

NOTE:

`Brendan`

We have a few learning objectives here today.
We'll start with what testing is, and why we need to do it.
Subsequently, we will write tests in Mocha using Javascript.

---

## Mocha

- A test runner for JS
- Can execute "spec" files either in browser, or in NodeJs

> - Executes tests, outputs reports

Author: ```suggestion
- Executes tests, output reports
```

Reviewer: Think I'll stick with "outputs" here

## Testing JS: Hands-on

[github.com/bguiz/workshop-rsk-js-testing](https://github.com/bguiz/workshop-rsk-js-testing/)

NOTE:

`Brendan` + `Dulce`

- Alright, now we're going to do a Javascript testing hands-on.
- Please follow the link above and it will take you to a workshop from DApps Dev Club created for a session which I ran last year.
- Instead of me presenting and doing the demo at the same time, I'm going to ask Dulce to do this,
- (swap over screen share)
- We won't be doing this entire exercise, when we get to the "version control with git" section, we'll skip right down to about the halfway mark, all the way to the heading "write some code"

`Dulce`

- (follow the instructions)
- (swap screenshare back)

---

## Right/wrong impl/spec

![DApps Dev Club - Implementation Specification Correctness Quadrants](/webinars/202007-005/dapps-dev-club-implementation-specification-correctness-quadrants.png) <!-- .element: style="max-width: 50%; max-height: 50%;" -->

NOTE:

`Brendan`

- Now that we have executed `npm run test`,
  we have completed writing a correct implementation,
  and a correct specification
- That's the best combination to have, but you cannot know that for sure

> - The remainder of this hands-on exercise will take you through various commbinations of right and wrong impls, and right and wrong specs,

Author: ```suggestion
- The remainder of this hands-on exercise will take you through various combinations of right and wrong impls, and right and wrong specs,
```

  which result in false positives, et cetera

> - However, we won't be doing this in today's session in light of time - you are of course encouraged to do this in your own time!

Author: ```suggestion
- However, we won't be doing this in today's session due to time constraints - you are of course encouraged to do this in your own time!
```

---

### `mocha` vs `truffle test`

| `mocha` | `truffle test` |
| --- | --- |
| `require()` | `artifacts.require()` |
| `describe()` | `contract()` ⃰ |
| `describe(() => {...})` | `contract((accounts) => {...})` |

NOTE:

`Brendan`

---

### State machines

- Finite State Automata

NOTE:

`Brendan`

- Before we start the hands-on section,
  let's talk about some computer science,
  very briefly, so that we have a better
  understanding of our approach towards testing.
- "State machines" is a term that derives from Mathematics about finite state automata
- Smart contracts have properties of state machines, let's get into some specifics

----

### State

- Smart contracts are stateful systems.
- This means that a smart contract can be
  said to be in a particular "state",
  at any point of time.
- This "state" is a set of variables,
  including their current values,
  stored by the smart contract.

NOTE:

`Brendan`

----

### State transitions

- A state transition is a function that allows
  users to change the state of the smart contract.
- When the values of one or more variables
  in the smart contract is updated,
  that is a state change.

> - A transaction added to to the ledger is the

Author: ```suggestion
- A transaction added to the ledger is the
```

  vehicle for a smart contract state change.

---

## Testing Solidity: Hands-on

- State
- State transitions
- Events
- ~~Mocked functions~~

NOTE:

`Brendan`

- Here are a few common categories of things to do while testing

> - We will **not** be doing any mocking in this session in light of time constraints. Instead, we'll give ourselves more time to focus on testing state, state transitions, and events

Author: ```suggestion
- We will **not** be doing any mocking in this session due to time constraints. Instead, we'll give ourselves more time to focus on testing state, state transitions, and events
```

- You will also need to install truffle via NodeJs
- And finally you will need to have the RSK node, called RSKj, installed on your system and running on the Regtest network
  - If you do not have this on your system already, please check out our previous webinars in which we go through the steps for this in great detail

---

## Testing Solidity: Hands-on

[github.com/bguiz/workshop-rsk-smart-contract-testing-truffle](https://github.com/bguiz/workshop-rsk-smart-contract-testing-truffle/)

NOTE:

`Brendan`

- Please go ahead and open up the link to that article which is essentially the written form of this tutorial
- One of the first few steps will be to git clone the repo at the github link above
- Now I'm going to swap over the screenshare to Dulce, who will demo this while I narrate,
  just like we did in the previous hands-on
- (swap screen share)

`Dulce`

- (does demo)
- (swap back screen share)

---

## Summary

- Testing
- Smart contracts as state machines
- Testing Javascript: **Impl** and **spec** were both JS
- Testing Solidity: **Impl** was Solidity, **spec** was JS
  - RSK Regtest

NOTE:

`Brendan`

> - While this webinar has been primarily intended as a hands-on workshop, we have covered some theory too, to do with softwate engineering principles around testing, and thinkign about smart contracts in terms of state and state transitions.

Author: ```suggestion
- While this webinar has been primarily intended as a hands-on workshop, we also covered some theory on software engineering principles around testing, and thinking about smart contracts in terms of state and state transitions.
```

> - And in the hands on section we created a Javascript application and tested it with Javascript, and followed that up with creating a smart contract in Solidity and testing that with Javascript.

Author: ```suggestion
- And in the hands-on section we created a Javascript application and tested it with Javascript, and also followed that up with creating a smart contract in Solidity and testing that with Javascript.
```

> - You will have noticed that we have used the RSK regtest network for our smart contracts, which runs locally, on your computer only. This is intentional: For these kinds of tests where you're doing active development, and needs faster iterations, a localhost-only blockchain is the right choice.

Author: ```suggestion
- You may have noticed that we have used the RSK regtest network for our smart contracts, which runs locally, on your computer only. This is intentional: For these kinds of tests where you're doing active development, and need faster iterations, a localhost-only blockchain is the right choice.
```

- However, note that you always have the option of running tests against your smart contracts deployed on a real peer-to-peer decentralised blockchain network, such as the RSK Testnet, or even the RSK Mainnet - but usually one would reserve this for a later stage in the project where you have considerations such as economic incentive based attacks or networks congestions or gas price hikes.

---

## Fin

Thank you!

[developers.rsk.co/webinars](/webinars/)

[gitter.im/rsksmart/getting-started](https://gitter.im/rsksmart/getting-started/)

NOTE:

`Brendan`

Thanks to everyone for attending!

> Be sure to check out developers.rsk.co/webinars for more sessions on RSK and RIF!

Author: ```suggestion
Be sure to check out developers.rsk.co/webinars for more educative sessions on RSK and RIF!
```
